[BLOG] Add May community update (#207)
pulsar-edit/pulsar-edit.github.io: docs/blog/20230501-Daeraxa-MayUpdate.md

---
title: Community Update
author: Daeraxa
date: 2023-05-01
category:
  - news
  - log
tag:
  - update
---

Is it a bird? Is it a plane? No it's the May community update!

<!-- more -->

# Welcome to the May Community Update

Hello again and a warm welcome to our May community update! In store for you this time are Pulsar iconography updates, `symbols-view` improvements, CI upgrades and bunch of upgrades to our package backend and website.

Just want to first mention that we have a [new survey](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSfnEEAQHUJbRVcH2NlNvLxmK0ZUcb5xuOCt1pYOGytvne0kJw/viewform?usp=sf_link) up, we would like some feedback from our community on a few aspects of the project so if you haven't answered this already then please have a look, every response is useful to us and we greatly appreciated.

Now without further waffling, onto the updates!

## Octicons iconography update

> So this is a change we [have in the works](https://github.com/pulsar-edit/pulsar/pull/509) thanks to [@confused-techie], to upgrade Pulsar's iconography by updating the version of [Octicons](https://primer.style/octicons/). The version being used currently in Pulasr is _really_ old (v4.4.0 - from 2016!) and there have been many, many updates since then with a whole bunch of new icons and improvements (now on version v18.3.0).

Reviewer: Typo here on Pulsar (pulasr)

Author: Good catch, annoyingly I did see this myself but apparently never committed it...

One of our others is a plan to hopefully modernise the UI, for example we have a bunch of new icons we can use for extending the set of file icons. You can see a couple of potential implementations in the below picture compared to the original. We actually have a survey up right now to gauge the community response to this so if you haven't already then please consider giving us [your opinion](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSfnEEAQHUJbRVcH2NlNvLxmK0ZUcb5xuOCt1pYOGytvne0kJw/viewform?usp=sf_link).

<img src="./assets/octicons3.png"/>

There is still some work to go here, particularly on making sure that where icons are used we are still using the appropriate ones or selecting a more appropriate icon now it is available in the new set.

If you want to read more details about what had to be done for the implementation then you can read the [document](https://github.com/pulsar-edit/pulsar/blob/octicons-v18.3.0/static/icons/README.md) that accompanies the PR that details what was done and how to maintain it in the future.

## Symbols view improvements

<img src="./assets/symbols-view.png"/>

> Currently in order to use Pulsar's symbols view for navigation you first have to generate a [ctags](https://ctags.io/) file for your project. This isn't really a perfect solution as it doesn't allow navigation of untitled files and requires the file to be updated every time there is a significant refactor of your code.

Reviewer 2: This isn't true. The `symbols-view` package uses `ctags` under the hood to dynamically generate symbols — which works OK but has some major limitations. For example, if our `ctags` configuration doesn't recognize your language, you're screwed.

You do need to have a `TAGS` file to do _project-wide_ symbol navigation, and that's also a problem. But Tree-sitter won't fix this in the short term.

> Currently in order to use Pulsar's symbols view for navigation you first have to generate a [ctags](https://ctags.io/) file for your project. This isn't really a perfect solution as it doesn't allow navigation of untitled files and requires the file to be updated every time there is a significant refactor of your code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Symbol-based navigation in Pulsar currently depends on [ctags](https://ctags.io/). It's versatile and can be configured to support lots of different source code files, but it reads from disk and doesn't work well with files that have been modified a lot since the last save. It also doesn't work _at all_ on brand-new, unsaved files, or with languages that it hasn't been configured for.```

> [@savetheclocktower] has been working on some improvements for this, for example for languages that have tree-sitter parsers, its job can be done much better - all it does is answer the question “what are the names and line numbers for important things like class and method definitions?”

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[@savetheclocktower] has been working on some improvements for this. For example, Tree-sitter parsers are quite good at this sort of code analysis, and can identify the important parts of a source code file with [a simple query file](https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/code-navigation-systems).
```

> Currently this is being explored due to the ongoing work to upgrade to a modern implementation of `tree-sitter` but the eventual goal would be to move to a provider/consumer model like our `autocomplete-plus` package which would allow for much more flexibility, for example [language servers](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/) are also potentially able to provide symbols, and on a project-wide basis - not just within a file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Language servers](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/) are another potential source of symbol information. Some language servers are even capable of supplying project-wide symbol information; this would improve other `symbol-view` responsibilities, like the “Go to Declaration” command.
```

> So to make steps towards achieving this, step one would be to refactor `symbols-view` to be more generic then step two would be to create packages called, for example, `symbol-provider-ctags` and `symbol-provider-tree-sitter` - both of which would be built-in packages.

Reviewer: I would avoid mentioning the step 2's details. Mainly because they can change - for example, I wasn't expecting to split symbols-view into different providers, so I'm not sure if it'll actually be done

Author: Maybe @savetheclocktower could weigh in on this one as the two statements are a little contradictory.

Reviewer 2: > I wasn't expecting to split symbols-view into different providers, so I'm not sure if it'll actually be done

You mean you wanted to leave `ctags` in `symbols-view` but still have it consume other providers? That's fine, but I did circulate a design document about a week ago and got no objections, so… this code is mostly written.

But, yes, it's still a good idea to be a little more vague in this paragraph.

> So to make steps towards achieving this, step one would be to refactor `symbols-view` to be more generic then step two would be to create packages called, for example, `symbol-provider-ctags` and `symbol-provider-tree-sitter` - both of which would be built-in packages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So to make steps towards achieving this, we'd refactor `symbols-view` to be just a generic UI for symbol navigation. We'd then package different “providers” of symbols as services for `symbols-view` to consume. This is very similar to how the `autocomplete-plus` package works.
```

> This has the potential to really upgrade this functionality and make navigating files and projects far more intuitive. Once the work for the `tree-sitter` upgrades have been completed then we will hopefully have something more concrete to share on this feature.

Reviewer: Again, these are different fronts - we can work on this functionality without depending on tree-sitter, and I'm trying to squeeze some time to implement this :)

Author: Fair enough, this was mostly based on @savetheclocktower's comments and overview in discord so that is what I went with. I'll have a look at redoing some of it.

Reviewer 2: I agree that this isn't tied specifically to Tree-sitter, but I do think that people won't really notice (or have a reason to care about) this enhancement until Tree-sitter does ship, at which point symbol generation

* will work for languages that haven't yet had it, like TypeScript;
* will work for files that haven't yet been saved; and
* will be more accurate for files that have been modified.

Reviewer 2: Oh, I realized that this is based on my remark that I'd have more time to work on this once I finished shipping Tree-sitter, so I agree with @mauricioszabo after all. We can rephrase this to something more like “we'll have more to share on this in the coming weeks.”

## Backend webhook

<img src="./assets/package-webhook.png"/>

[@confused-techie] has been busy adding yet another [new feature](https://github.com/pulsar-edit/package-backend/pull/156) to our package backend, this time it is a new webhook that allows us to publish messages and notifications when package authors publish and update their packages. You can check this out in action in our [backend-notifications](https://discordapp.com/channels/992103415163396136/1045131651748999239) channel on Discord.

## Package website readme links overhaul

<img src="./assets/package-frontend.png"/>

Now some [changes to our package website](https://github.com/pulsar-edit/package-frontend/pull/96). There are a few separate, but related, changes by [@confused-techie] here that involve improving our package website to overhaul some of the issues we have with readme links.

The first change adds shorthand string author assignment in the `package.json` file of a package. Previously if this was not populated fully then the author wouldn't display. This fixes that problem by allowing the partial and shorter form details.

> **Note**: do we have an example of what this shorter form looks like vs what was required?

Reviewer 3: So essentially according to the [CommonJS Package Spec](https://wiki.commonjs.org/wiki/Packages/1.0) to define an author you would need an object containing: `name`, `email`, and `web`. 

The [NPM Specs](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v9/configuring-npm/package-json#people-fields-author-contributors) expand on this, allowing what I've, lovingly, decided to call author shorthand, where you can use a string such as `author <email> (web)` instead of an object.

But when originally creating the parsing for this author object shorthand, I had never considered that the spec allows for the exclusion of both or some of the fields. With `author` being the only thing required within the author object shorthand.

So the change here, is what I decided to call partial shorthand, where only some of those fields are defined, which is what that PR did, brought support for partial shorthand author strings, (although in my implementation everything is optional, including the author. Unlike NPM's spec)

Author: Could you have a look again to see if this is accurate?

Reviewer 3: Addressed a syntax error an an additional review, but otherwise, yes this looks perfectly accurate now!

Our next change also involves dead Atom links, in this case links to the Atom Flight Manual which has been taken down along with the rest of the `atom.io` sites. Again we are performing a redirection here but this time to the archived version of the website found on [Internet Archive](https://web.archive.org/web/20221215003438/https://flight-manual.atom.io/). This keeps the correct link handling and means that the documentation the package author was intending to link to is still available.

<img src="./assets/flight-manual.png"/>

Our last change is that relative links are now preserved against the repository of the package. For example `./LICENSE.md` => `https://github.com/pulsar-edit/package-frontend/LICENSE.md`.

These were some much needed changes which should hopefully improve the overall experience of using the website.

## Decoupling http handling for the package backend

Lastly we have yet another [@confused-techie] update in the works, this time [improvements to the package backend](https://github.com/pulsar-edit/package-backend/pull/171) to make developing the backend more accessible to new contributors as well making tasks such as testing easier.

> Currently the handling for HTTP and logic is all mixed together in the backend which means that early every function within the backend has a signature like:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Currently the handling for HTTP and logic is all mixed together in the backend which means that nearly every function within the backend has a signature like:
```

// On Failure
await common.handleError(req, res, err);
return;
```

Which has a few downsides; when testing a function to the backend a fake Response and Request object must be made that also matches the ones provided by ExpressJS and those objects have to be monitored for the functions behavior, or otherwise the API has to be tested as just that, an API by calling the ExpressJS module itself then checking the api returns for behavior.

This also means that any new developers have to be familiar with ExpressJS to contribute and each function has to know the exact HTTP Status codes that have to be returned and in some circumstances concern themselves with header fields to set etc.

The planned changes are to allow each function to return just a serverStatusObject (which is used frequently within the backend) so we change that same signature from above to:

```js
// On Success
return {
	ok: true,
	content: data,
};

// On Failure
return {
	ok: false,
	content: err,
};
```

This has the upside of letting only the code that retrieves API requests deal with responding to them. The rest of the backend can work with just normal functions, without a care in the world about HTTP handling.

> The hope is that by lowering the amount of knowledge needed to contribute more people might be encouraged to get involved and comes with the added bonus that now to test we can just call functions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The hope is that by lowering the amount of knowledge needed to contribute, more people might be encouraged to get involved and comes with the added bonus that now to test we can just call functions.
```

This feels right in my head, but not sure if it's grammatically right lol

Reviewer 2: Not quite, no.

“This change lowers the amount of knowledge needed to contribute, so we hope that more people might be encouraged to get involved. As a bonus, it makes the code much easier to test.“

Author: Sounds good, I've added this suggestion.

## Backend webhook

<img src="./assets/package-webhook.png">

[@confused-techie] has been busy adding yet another [new feature](https://github.com/pulsar-edit/package-backend/pull/156) to our package backend, this time it is a new webhook that allows us to publish messages and notifications when package authors publish and update their packages. You can check this out in action in our [backend-notifications](https://discordapp.com/channels/992103415163396136/1045131651748999239) channel on Discord.

## Package website readme links overhaul

<img src="./assets/package-frontend.png">

Now some [changes to our package website](https://github.com/pulsar-edit/package-frontend/pull/96). There are a few separate, but related, changes by [@confused-techie] here that involve improving our package website to overhaul some of the issues we have with readme links.

> The first change adds shorthand string author assignment in the `package.json` file of a package. The [npm package specification(https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v9/configuring-npm/package-json#people-fields-author-contributors)] allows the three author properties to be combined into a single string e.g.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The first change adds shorthand string author assignment in the `package.json` file of a package. The [npm package specification](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v9/configuring-npm/package-json#people-fields-author-contributors) allows the three author properties to be combined into a single string e.g.
```

Just a small syntax fix here, but otherwise to your previous comment, this section now looks perfect!

}
```

Previously if this was not populated fully with all three options then the author simply wouldn't display. This fixes that problem by allowing the optional fields to be omitted (actually this is taken a step further in our implementation - even `name` can be optional)

In a similar vein we also now support [shortcut syntax](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v9/configuring-npm/package-json#repository) for the `repository` field of the `package.json`. For example writing `authorName/repoName` wasn't working so we have provided support for this.

We noticed that many package authors would link to other community packages in their readmes in order to show other packages that work with or complement their package. Unfortunately as these point to the old `atom.io` website it means that every single link simply redirects to the [sunsetting Atom](https://github.blog/2022-06-08-sunsetting-atom/) page. This is really not helpful as it entirely breaks the embedded links, sure there are workaround, people could look at the link and work out what packages it links to but this is a hassle when all you want to do is click a link.

> <img src="./assets/sunsetting.png"/>

Reviewer 2: For the future, it's best to either omit the trailing slash here…

```html
<img src="./assets/sunsetting.png">
```

…or add a space before it.

```
<img src="./assets/sunsetting.png" />
```

I don't imagine anything will explode, but the way you've got it here is not valid HTML.

Author: Oh that was my mistake doing some mass updates to remove the height option, should probably fix that, the space was there before.

Therefore in order to solve this a feature has been added that takes these `https://atom.io/packages/...` links and transforms them to `https://web.pulsar-edit.dev/packages/...` so that the author's original intent for package linking is not lost. We did have a [conversation](https://github.com/pulsar-edit/package-frontend/issues/95) as to whether it was "right" to make these changes but we reasoned that:

1. these links are all effectively "dead" so currently serve no useful purpose and
2. they are _already_ being redirected from the original link.

We feel that this is an entirely benign change even though it does redirect from the author's originally intended link to another.

> Our next change also involves dead Atom links, in this case links to the Atom Flight Manual which has been taken down along with the rest of the `atom.io` sites. Again we are performing a redirection here but this time to the archived version of the website found on [Internet Archive](https://web.archive.org/web/20221215003438/https://flight-manual.atom.io/). This keeps the correct link handling and means that the documentation the package author was intending to link to is still available.

Reviewer 2: Also, I didn't realize until now that the “archived version” we were redirecting to was the one from the Wayback Machine. There's also [the version archived here](https://atom-flight-manual-archive.github.io/); it ought to be quite a bit faster.

Reviewer 3: This was actually a choice on my end about where the redirects would go on the frontend.

While I'm aware of that other archive, I thought it'd make more sense to redirect to an official source, rather than a community member hosting the page. Especially if it's only there to handle the odd page or two being redirected to it

Author: I did think the same (really this would be a discussion for the actual PR as this is just describing it) but the internet archive one is likely to be stable where the other one could potentially be taken down without notice.
